p8105_hw1_sdc2157
================
Stephanie Calluori
2023-10-04

``` r
library(tidyverse)
library(readxl)
```

# Importing Data and NA Check

``` r
pols_month_raw <- 
  read_csv("data/pols-month.csv")

sum(is.na(pols_month_raw))

snp_raw <-
  read_csv("data/snp.csv")

sum(is.na(snp_raw))

unemployment_raw <-
  read_csv("data/unemployment.csv")

sum(is.na(unemployment_raw))

mr_trash_raw <-
  read_excel("data/202309 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", sheet = 1, range = "A2:N586")

sum(is.na(pull(mr_trash_raw, Dumpster)))

prof_trash_raw <-
  read_excel("data/202309 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", sheet = 2, range = "A2:M108")

sum(is.na(pull(prof_trash_raw, Dumpster)))

gwyn_trash_raw <-
  read_excel("data/202309 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", sheet = 4, range = "A2:L157")

sum(is.na(pull(gwyn_trash_raw, Dumpster)))

mci_amyloid_raw <-
  read_csv("data/mci_amyloid.csv", skip = 1, col_names = TRUE)

sum(is.na(mci_amyloid_raw))

mci_baseline_raw <- 
  read_csv("data/MCI_baseline.csv", skip = 1, col_names = TRUE)

sum(is.na(mci_baseline_raw))
```

# Problem 1

## Pols-month Cleaning

``` r
month_df = 
  tibble(
    month_num = 1:12,
    month = c("jan", "feb", "mar", "apr", "may", "june", "july", "aug", "sept", "oct", "nov", "dec")
  )

pols_month_df <- pols_month_raw |>
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  separate(mon, c("year", "month_num", "day"), "-", convert = TRUE) |> 
  mutate(prez = recode(
      prez_dem, 
      "0" = "gop", 
      "1" = "dem")) |> 
  left_join(x = _, y = month_df, by = "month_num") |> 
  select(year, month, everything(), -month_num, -day, -prez_gop, -prez_dem)
```

The pols-month data set describes the number of Democratic and
Republican politicians in various political offices at any given time.
The data set contains 822 observations and 9 variables. Variables
include year, month, gov_gop, sen_gop, rep_gop, gov_dem, sen_dem,
rep_dem, prez. Data was collected from 1947 to 2015.

## Snp Cleaning

Due to the way that the lubridate package converts two digit years into
four digit years, we corrected the conversion to ensure twentieth and
twenty-first century years were properly captured. Since the other data
sets in fivethirtyeight only went up to 2015, we assumed that this was
the cutoff date.

``` r
snp_all_dates <- snp_raw |>
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  mutate(date = lubridate::mdy(date)) |> 
  separate(date, c("year", "month_num", "day"), "-", convert = TRUE) |> 
  left_join(x = _, y = month_df, by = "month_num") |> 
  select(year, month, close, -month_num, -day)

snp_dates_before69 <- snp_all_dates |> 
  filter(!year %in% c(1969:2015)) |> 
  mutate(year = year-100)

snp_dates_after69 <- snp_all_dates |> 
  filter(year %in% c(1969:2015))

snp_combined_df <- bind_rows(snp_dates_before69, snp_dates_after69)
```

The snp data set describes the closing values of the Standard and Poor’s
stock market index at any given time. The data set contains 787
observations and 3 variables. Variables include year, month, close. Data
was collected from 1950 to 2015.

## Unemployment cleaning

``` r
unemployment_df <- unemployment_raw |> 
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  pivot_longer(
    jan:dec,
    names_to = "month",
    values_to = "percent_unemployed"
  )
```

The unemployment data set describes the monthly percentage of unemployed
individuals in the U.S. from 1948 to 2015. The data set contains 816
observations and 3 variables. Variables include year, month,
percent_unemployed.

## Joining of FiveThirtyEight datasets

``` r
fivethirtyeight_df <- 
  left_join(pols_month_df, snp_combined_df, by = c("year", "month")) |> 
  left_join(x = _, y = unemployment_df, by = c("year", "month"))
```

The combined fiverthirtyeight data set compiles contains 822
observations and 11 variables. Variables include year, month, gov_gop,
sen_gop, rep_gop, gov_dem, sen_dem, rep_dem, prez, close,
percent_unemployed. Data spans the years 1947 to 2015.

# Problem 2

## Mr. Trash Wheel Cleaning

Note: The year variable needed to be converted from a character variable
to a numeric variable.

``` r
mr_trash_df <- mr_trash_raw |> 
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  rename(volume_cubic_yds = volume_cubic_yards, homes_powered_old = homes_powered) |> 
  mutate(wheel = "mr_trash",
         homes_powered = weight_tons*500/30,
         year = as.numeric(year)) |> 
  select(wheel, everything(), -homes_powered_old)
```

The Mr. Trash Wheel data set contains 584 observations and 15 variables.
Variables include wheel, dumpster, month, year, date, weight_tons,
volume_cubic_yds, plastic_bottles, polystyrene, cigarette_butts,
glass_bottles, plastic_bags, wrappers, sports_balls, homes_powered. Data
was collected from 2014 to 2023. During this time, Mr. Trash Wheel
collected about 1875 tons of trash, which powered approximately 31252
homes!

## Prof. Trash Wheel Cleaning

``` r
prof_trash_df <- prof_trash_raw |> 
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  rename(volume_cubic_yds = volume_cubic_yards, homes_powered_old = homes_powered) |> 
  mutate(wheel = "prof_trash",
         homes_powered = weight_tons*500/30) |> 
  select(wheel, everything(), -homes_powered_old)
```

The Prof. Trash Wheel data set contains 106 observations and 14
variables. Variables include wheel, dumpster, month, year, date,
weight_tons, volume_cubic_yds, plastic_bottles, polystyrene,
cigarette_butts, glass_bottles, plastic_bags, wrappers, homes_powered.
Data was collected from 2017 to 2023. During this time, Prof. Trash
Wheel collected about 216 tons of trash, which powered approximately
3604 homes!

## Gywnnda Trash Wheel Cleaning

``` r
gwyn_trash_df <- gwyn_trash_raw |> 
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  rename(volume_cubic_yds = volume_cubic_yards, homes_powered_old = homes_powered) |> 
  mutate(wheel = "gwynnda_trash",
         homes_powered = weight_tons*500/30) |> 
  select(wheel, everything(), -homes_powered_old)
```

The Gwynnda Trash Wheel data set contains 155 observations and 13
variables. Variables include wheel, dumpster, month, year, date,
weight_tons, volume_cubic_yds, plastic_bottles, polystyrene,
cigarette_butts, plastic_bags, wrappers, homes_powered. Data was
collected from 2021 to 2023. During this time, Gwynnda Trash Wheel
collected about 452 tons of trash, which powered approximately 7528
homes!

## Joining of Trash Wheel datasets

``` r
trash_wheels_df <- bind_rows(mr_trash_df, prof_trash_df, gwyn_trash_df)
```

The combined data set contains 845 observations and 15 variables.
Variables include wheel, dumpster, month, year, date, weight_tons,
volume_cubic_yds, plastic_bottles, polystyrene, cigarette_butts,
glass_bottles, plastic_bags, wrappers, sports_balls, homes_powered. From
2014 to 2023, the three trash wheels collected a total of 2543 tons of
trash, which powered approximately 42384 homes!

Professor Trash Wheel collected a total of 216 tons of trash.

In July 2021, Gwynnda collected a total of 16300 cigarette butts.

# Problem 3

## MCI_baseline Cleaning

The first two rows of the raw mci_baseline data set contain a header and
the variable names. When importing the data set (see above), we skipped
the header in the first row and set col_names to TRUE, so we only
imported the variable names and observations. **There were no NA values
in the data set. The period (“.”) in the age_at_onset indicated that the
participant never developed MCI during the study.**

We recoded the categorical variables of sex and apoe4 status, so the
values appeared as the category names instead of numbers.

``` r
mci_baseline_df <- mci_baseline_raw |> 
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  mutate(sex = recode(sex, "0" = "female", "1" = "male"),
         apoe4 = recode(apoe4, "0" = "non_carrier", "1" = "carrier")) |> 
  filter(!(current_age == age_at_onset))

removed_participant <- mci_baseline_raw |> 
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  filter(current_age == age_at_onset)
```

Based on the mci_baseline data set, 483 participants were recruited into
the study. When cleaning the data, we removed participants who did not
meet the inclusion criteria for the study (participants had to be free
of MCI at baseline). 1 participant was found to have MCI at baseline,
which was was participant 234. 482 participants were included in our
final analyses. Thus, the cleaned data set contained 482 observations
and 6 variables

The average baseline age of participants was 65 years old with a
standard deviation of 3 years.

It was found that 96 participants (20%) developed MCI over the course of
the study. Of the 211 women in the study, 30% women were APOE4 carriers.

## MCI_amyloid Cleaning

The first two rows of the raw mci_amyloid data set contain a header and
the variable names. When importing the data set (see above), we skipped
the header in the first row and set col_names to TRUE, so we only
imported the variable names and observations. There are NA values
present in the data set. NA values were not removed at this time,
because it is important to determine the questions that we would like to
answer with the data before identifying if and when NA values should be
removed.

``` r
mci_amyloid_df <- mci_amyloid_raw |> 
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  rename(id = study_id, time_to_visit_ir = baseline) |> 
  mutate(time_to_visit_ir = as.numeric(time_to_visit_ir), 
         time_2 = as.numeric(time_2),
         time_4 = as.numeric(time_4),
         time_6 = as.numeric(time_6),
         time_8 = as.numeric(time_8)) |> 
  filter(id != pull(removed_participant, id))
```

To clean the mci_amyloid data set, the variables were renamed and the
classes of variables were corrected. Here, the time_to_visit_ir:time_8
variables were changed from character to numeric variables. We also
removed the one participant who did not meet the study’s inclusion
criteria based on the mci_baseline data set cleaning. The cleaned
mci_amyloid data set contains 486 observations and 6 variables.

## Joining of MCI data sets

``` r
mci_no_overlap_df <- anti_join(mci_baseline_df, mci_amyloid_df, join_by(id))

mci_intersection_df <- inner_join(mci_baseline_df, mci_amyloid_df, join_by(id))

write_csv(mci_intersection_df,"data/mci_intersection.csv")
```

It was found that 8 participants were not included in both data sets.

It was found that 8 participants were not included in both data sets.

The combined data set contains 474 observations and 11 variables.
Variables include id, current_age, sex, education, apoe4, age_at_onset,
time_to_visit_ir, time_2, time_4, time_6, time_8. 143 of the
participants in the combined data set were APOE4 carriers.
